---
author: "Victor Guadilla-Gomez"
author_url: ""
date: "2019-06-20 11:30:00 +0000 UTC"
location: "Amphi TEILLAC"
title: "Beta decay of neutron-rich nuclei with isomeric states: TAGS measurements for reactor calculations"
author_filiation: "Subatech (équipe SEN)"
author_filiation_url: ""
type: "communication-scientifique"
author2: "Ken Takayama "
author_url2: ""
author_filiation2: "High Energy Accelerator Research Organization (KEK), Accelerator Laboratory"
author_filiation_url2: ""
title2: "Brief History of Hadron Accelerators and the Next Generation of Hadron Therapy"
---
_The study of the beta decay of neutron rich niobium isotopes is a rather complicated problem due to the existence, in many cases, of isomeric states close in energy to the ground states. The disentanglement of the beta decays of these levels requires a good separation technique and a well-controlled detection set-up. Many of these niobium isotopes are fission products contributing significantly to the reactor antineutrino spectrum and to the reactor decay heat. Using summation calculations, some of them have been identified as high priority cases to be measured. The reason is that their beta-intensity distributions, ingredients of these summation calculations, are missing or seem affected by a systematic error, the so-called Pandemonium effect, in the evaluated databases. The improvement of these decay data will allow a better understanding of the reactor antineutrino spectrum with the summation method, as well as a more accurate prediction of the reactor decay heat. Total Absorption Gamma-ray Spectroscopy (TAGS) has proven to be a suitable technique to measure beta-intensity distributions without Pandemonium.__A campaign of measurements was carried out in Jyvaskyla with beams provided by the mass separator of the IGISOL IV facility. A precision trap-assisted separation was used, with the JYFLTRAP double Penning trap system. The beta decay of the nuclei extracted from the trap was measured with the Decay Total Absorption gamma-ray Spectrometer (DTAS) in coincidence with a plastic beta detector. In this talk we will present the results for 100Nb and 102Nb, each with an isomeric state 313 keV and 94 keV, respectively. The experimental strategies followed to disentangle the decays of each ground state and isomeric state will be presented, as well as the impact of these results on decay heat and antineutrino spectrum summation calculations._


[Link indico](https://indico.in2p3.fr/event/19061/)




[Slides](https://atrium.in2p3.fr/5d81ada7-a8fb-444f-9a58-d405f14ffa3f)

<!-- SUMMARY2 -->



I

t took about 160 years 
for particle accelerators to evolve 
from Cathode tube to LHC
 via the invention of Electrostatic Accelerator, Betatron, Cyclotron, and Synchrotron
.
 It is well known that 
their 
acceleration principle
s
 
are
 
governed by Gauss
 law, Gauss law
/
Faraday law, and 
a full-set of Maxwell equation, respectively. Accelerator performing 
on
 a simple operating principle is generic beyond all doubt. Electrostatic accelerator such as Cockcroft-Walton or Van de Graaff is almighty and never cho
oses ion species or their charge-state
. Their invention and development had been quite early and so quick. In the next place, induction accelerator such as Betatron or Linear Induction Accelerator (Linear Betatron)
 
is generic and should have evolved much 
faster
 than Cyclotron or Synchrotron. However, it was not true in history. 
Technology 
for 
m
icrowave or RF acceleration 
dramatically advanced through and just after World War II, where about 150 B US$ in currency value had been invested to develop Radar wea
pons and to deploy them in UA
/
Great Britain
 (major)
, Germany, and Japan. If this cost is regarded as R&amp;D cost for 
RF and microwave 
accelerator
s
 
having 
ma
de
 their appearance after WW
-
II, we will be surprised at their quick evolution. 



















































 In 1990’s a low-loss 
magnetic core material such as nanocry
s
t
a
l
line alloy and fast high-power solid-state switching device such as Si-MOSFET have been 
developed
 to become commercially available. Those devices allow to realize an induction synchrotron
,
 where a 1-to-1 pulse transformer called the induction cell 
driven by the switching power supply is
 employed as an acceleration device instead of 
a usual 
RF cavity
 and a large freedom of beam handling in the moving direction is promised
.
 At KEK the slow cy
cling/fast cycling induction synchrotron were demonstrated in 2006
 [1]
 and 2013
 [2].
 
   
 





























Recently a

 novel concept of hadron therapy

 [3]

 allow
ing
 tracking irradiation on
 
a
 moving and deformed 
tumor 
target
 has been proposed















 

under
 the interna
tiona
l collaboration, based on 
the
 fast cycling induction synchrotron








.
 
It is named 
E


nergy
 S


weep 
Co


mpact 
R


apid Cycling 
T


herapy (ESCORT). Its 
concept is characterized 
as follow
s;




















a) Its beam driver is a fast cycling induction synchrotron
 (
10-
20 Hz)
, where a fully 
stripped heavy ion beam
 
is delivered from the laser ablation ion source, the injected ion beam is captured in the barrier bucket and accelerated with the induction step voltage, 
a beam spill is continuously extracted by the energy sweep extraction
 
method
.
















b) A combination of beam profile monitors and t
he full-body Liq. Xe 3


_

g 

_

 camera
 being developed by D.Thers _

et al.

_

 
is used to 
obtain 
the dose profile
/
position in depth by detecting prompt 









_

g

_

s. The accompanied X-ray camera also catches 
the position
/
profile of the 
tumor 
targe
t
. Signals 
are
 quickly proces
s
ed 
in computers 
and the irradiation errors are found 
at
 20 Hz.




















The ESCORT in India is seriously under consideration
 now
.

 A

t the seminar, 
History of hadron accelerators and the latest topic in their medical applications will be 
discussed
.














[1] K.Takayama _

et al.

_

, 
“
Experimental Demonstration of the Induction Synchrotro
n”, 






_

Phys. Rev. Lett.

_

 

98

, 054801 (2007).









[2] K.Takayama _

et al.

_

, 
“
Induction 
acceleration of heavy ions in the KEK digital accelerator: Demonstration of a fast-cycling induction synchrotro
n”, 







_

Phys. Rev. ST-AB 

_

17

, 010101 (2014).







[3] Leo Kwee Wah
, K.Takayama _

et al.

_

, “
Compact hadron driver for cancer therapies using continuous energy 
sweep scanning
”, _

Phys. Rev. AB

_

 

19

, 042802 (2016).



















 [Link indico](https://indico.in2p3.fr/event/19061/)



[Slides](https://atrium.in2p3.fr/13a0612f-cf2f-4339-8c15-ab7c9c9ebed1)



 


