---
author: "Mateusz Sitarz"
author_url: ""
date: "2019-02-07 12:45:00 +0000 UTC"
location: "Amphi Pascal"
title: "Research on the Production of medical radionuclides"
author_filiation: "University of Warsaw - Subatech - ARRONAX"
author_filiation_url: "http://www-subatech.in2p3.fr"
type: "communication-scientifique"
author2: "Marco Cirelli"
author_url2: ""
author_filiation2: "LPTHE Jussieu"
author_filiation_url2: "https://www.lpthe.jussieu.fr"
title2: "What is Dark Matter ?"
---
Many radioactive isotopes are commonly used in medicine, both in diagnosis and therapy. However, steady development of nuclear medicine demands the application of new medical radioisotopes which production and chemical processing is still under the investigation. During the seminar, I will present two of them, scandium and ruthenium, recently researched by the France-Poland collaboration [1,2].




[1] Mateusz Sitarz, Etienne Nigron, Arnaud Guertin, Férid Haddad, Tomas Matulewicz. New Cross-Sections for natMo(α,x) Reactions and Medical 97Ru Production Estimations with Radionuclide Yield Calculator. Instruments 2019, 3, 7; doi:10.3390/instruments3010007

[2] Mateusz Sitarz, Katarzyna Szkliniarz, Jerzy Jastrzębski, Jarosław Choiński, Arnaud Guertin, Ferid Haddad, Andrzej Jakubowski, Kamil Kapinos, Maciej Kisieliński, Agnieszka Majkowska, Etienne Nigron, Malihe Rostampour, Anna Stolarz, Agnieszka Trzcińska, Rafał Walczak, Jolanta Wojtkowska, Wiktor Zipper, Aleksander Bilewicz. Production of Sc medical radioisotopes with proton and deuteron beams. Applied Radiation and Isotopes 142 (2018) 104–112.

[Slides](https://atrium.in2p3.fr/0c39d908-e104-49dc-947b-cdca3d6f5b36)




<!-- SUMMARY2 -->

Dark Matter constitutes 84% of the mass and about 26% of the total energy density in the Universe, but its identity is still unknown. I will review (perhaps in a biased way) the current popular candidates from a theoretical point of view and sketch the status of some of the searches.

[Slides](https://atrium.in2p3.fr/13367a59-57cf-4d73-8775-adb2753bed1b)
